[DOC] use case : module renaming (#3872)
OCA/OpenUpgrade: docsource/use_cases/module_renaming.rst

Module Renaming
+++++++++++++++

Example
-------

From version 14.0 to version 15.0, the ``crm_iap_lead_enrich`` module
has been renamed into ``crm_iap_enrich``.

See `Full v14 Module <https://github.com/odoo/odoo/tree/14.0/addons/crm_iap_lead_enrich>`_.

See `Full v15 Module <https://github.com/odoo/odoo/tree/15.0/addons/crm_iap_enrich>`_.

Result without migration script / Expected Result
-------------------------------------------------

V14 table ``ir_module_module``
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

.. csv-table::
   :header: "id", "name", "state", "latest_version"

   "200", "crm_iap_lead_enrich", "installed", "14.0.1.1"

V15 table ``ir_module_module`` (Without openupgrade)
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

.. csv-table::
   :header: "id", "name", "state", "latest_version"

   "200", "crm_iap_lead_enrich", "to upgrade", "14.0.1.1"
   "405", "crm_iap_enrich", "uninstalled", ""

**Problem**:

- The v14 module remains in a ``to upgrade`` state.
- The v15 module has not been installed.

As a result, the models of the module have not been loaded, the related features
are not available, and the database is in a unstable state.

> V12 table ``ir_module_module`` (With openupgrade)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
V15 table ``ir_module_module`` (With openupgrade)
```

"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

.. csv-table::

>    :header: "id", "create_date", "write_date"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   :header: "id", "name", "state", "latest_version"
```

of openupgrade.

* Until version 13, the file is present in this path:
  ``odoo/addons/openupgrade_records/lib/apriori.py``.

* from version 14.0 onwards, the file is present in this path:
  ``openupgrade_scripts/apriori.py``.

Add a key in the following dict:

.. code-block:: python

    renamed_modules = {
        "crm_iap_lead_enrich": "crm_iap_enrich",
    }

See `Full v15 apriori file <https://github.com/OCA/OpenUpgrade/blob/97491cb7d9a8ed494a49cf1db9b7fc8852aac254/openupgrade_scripts/apriori.py#L9-L27>`_.

pre-migration.py file
"""""""""""""""""""""

in the migration folder of the ``base`` module, add:

.. code-block:: python

    from odoo.addons.openupgrade_scripts.apriori import renamed_modules

    @openupgrade.migrate(use_env=False)
    def migrate(cr, version):
        openupgrade.update_module_names(cr, renamed_modules.items())

See `Full v15 base pre migration file <https://github.com/OCA/OpenUpgrade/blob/97491cb7d9a8ed494a49cf1db9b7fc8852aac254/openupgrade_scripts/scripts/base/15.0.1.3/pre-migration.py#L73>`_.

Note: The addition is done at the initialization of the OpenUpgrade Project,
for each new version. You will not have to do this,

> if you are working on a version of OpenUpgrade under development.

Reviewer: I find that the note is not clear. What do you mean by a version of "OpenUpgrade under development" ?

Author: I mean that when openupgrade maintainers are initializing the repo for a new version (16.0 for example), they populate the apriori.py file, so, after that, there is no need to add new entries for odoo modules. (theoretically!).
but thinking about that point, maybe it's not allways true. So I propose to remove this note. What do you think ?

Reviewer: I will then suggest this
```suggestion
Note: The addition is done at the initialization of the OpenUpgrade Project,
for each new version. So you will generally not have to do this, as it's only OpenUpgrade maintainers that initialize the OpenUpgrade Project.
```
Or something like this. :) I think that the comment is still useful. We just need to say that it may be not always the case.

Coverage File
"""""""""""""

A coverage file is present in each version:

* Until version 13, the file is present in this path:

>   ``odoo/openupgrade/doc/source/modulesXXX-YYY.py``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ``odoo/openupgrade/doc/source/modulesXXX-YYY.rst``.
```

* from version 14.0 onwards, the file is present in this path:

>   ``docsource/modulesXXX-YYY.py``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ``docsource/modulesXXX-YYY.rst``.
```

Edit this file, and add the following text:

.. code-block:: rst

    +-----------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
    | |new| crm_iap_enrich              | Renamed from crm_iap_lead_enrich                |
    +-----------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
    | |del| crm_iap_lead_enrich         | Renamed to crm_iap_enrich                       |

>     +-----------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------+

Reviewer: There is 3 columns in the file `modulesXXX-YYY.rst`. So I think it's better to propose an example with 3 columns, even if the last one is left blank. Or you can name the column so that there is no ambiguity in which column to put the rename information.

Author: header and third column added. Thanks for your remark.

Generate / Update analysis file
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

As long as the renaming has not been identified, the ``upgrade_analysis.txt`` generated
at the initialization of the OpenUpgrade version is partially wrong, because openupgrade
considers that the xml_id of the module are new, while they can come from the module of
the previous version.

> For the modules that concern Odoo, you must therefore update the version analysis
> with the upgrade_analysis tool present in the OCA/server-tools project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the Odoo modules that are concerned by the renaming, you must update the version
analysis with the upgrade_analysis tool present in the OCA/server-tools project.
```

Or any other formulation, because I did not understand the previous one. What is a "modules that concern Odoo" ? It may just be a mistake. ;)

Author: modules that concern Odoo = Odoo modules. 

suggestion applied.

Once done, the analysis file contains correct information, and can be studied to

> write remaing pre / post migration scripts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
write renaming pre / post migration scripts.
```

Author: rereading the sentence, I think my idea was to write "remaining". OK with that ?

> Once done, the analysis file contains correct information, and can be studied to
> write remaining pre / post migration scripts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the analysis is done with the updated ``apriory.py`` file, the analysis
file contains correct information, and can be studied to write remaining
pre / post migration scripts.
```

This way it seams clearer to me that the new `apriory.py` should be used to run the analysis. It can be obvious, but I find it good to mention it.

    DEL ir.actions.server: crm_iap_lead_enrich.action_enrich_mail [renamed to crm_iap_enrich module]

See `Full v15 upgrade analysis file <https://github.com/OCA/OpenUpgrade/blob/97491cb7d9a8ed494a49cf1db9b7fc8852aac254/openupgrade_scripts/scripts/crm_iap_enrich/15.0.1.1/upgrade_analysis.txt>`_.

Notes
-----

* In the ``apriori.py`` file, in the ``renamed_modules`` dict, put the Odoo renaming at
  the beginning, ordered by module name, then OCA modules renaming, with the mention of
  OCA repository. Example:

.. code-block:: python

    renamed_modules = {
        # Odoo
        'crm_reveal': 'crm_iap_lead',
        'payment_ogone': 'payment_ingenico',
        # OCA/delivery-carrier
        'delivery_carrier_label_ups': 'delivery_ups_oca',
        # OCA/event
        'website_event_filter_selector': 'website_event_filter_city',
    }

* If your instance has custom modules, and if you took advantage of the migration
  to refactor these custom modules by renaming them,
  you can add the following lines at the end of this file:

.. code-block:: python

    renamed_modules.update({
        "my_obsolete_module": "my_renamed_module",
    })

> (no need in this case to propose a PR to the community)

Reviewer: Very good idea. I didn't use this trick and I constantly run with merge conflict when upgrading the `apriory.py` file. Thanks for the advice. :)
